# UX Design for Pandemic Information for the Public
### Amanda Ruan

#### Overall description about the project and my motivation:
In this assignment, I aim to focus on two public health mobile apps that feature information related to the pandemic COVID-19 for the public. One is the official app of CDC(Centers for Disease Control and Prevention), and the other app is called COVID-19Tracker, which is developed by HealthLynked Corp and updates worldwide COVID-19 information. Since early last quarter, I have been monitoring information related to the outbreak of the pandemic, including news, social media messages, and also relevant webpages, programs and apps developed for the public. CDC app and COVID-19Tracker app are two of the many apps I downloaded in the early days to track COVID-19 information. During this process of gaining information, I have observed many people, such as my friends and family, who were overwhelmed and confused by both the abundance of information on the Internet and the platforms that provide the information, as the platforms’ designs might not be user-friendly. I think it is important for the public to gain timely, clear, relevant, and true information through the uses of public health mobile apps and platforms, especially during this time. I hope I could contribute to the User Experience/Interface Design of these public health apps and propose suggestions for healthcare organizations to better help the public in acquiring pandemic-relevant information. 

## First App - CDC
#### Information about the app:
- https://www.cdc.gov/mobile/applications/cdcgeneral/promos/cdcmobileapp.html
- This is the official app of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). CDC is a national public health institute of the United States and is also a U.S. federal agency. The CDC app provides public health information to the public. The app’s homepage features feeds of articles/news related to different public health information. The app has a navigation bar at the top, which contains a menu button and a filter button, and does not have tap bar at the bottom. Under the menu button, there are eight main sections, which are “return to home”, “news”, “articles”, “data”, “facts”, “journals”, “photos”, “audio”, “videos”, and “notifications”; each section contains lines of links, organized by themes, directed to different subpages. For instance, under the “news” section, a line of link is called “Coronavirus Disease 2019”, and under this subpage are CDC articles/news related to the COVID-19 information. 
#### Motivation:
My motivation to explore the CDC mobile app is that CDC is the official source of COVID-19 related decisions, updates and information to the general public in the United States. The CDC app could be an important source for the public to gain pandemic information, and thus the usability design of the app is also important. I saw user comments in the App Store saying they couldn’t find information they want and that some links did not work. Acknowledge both the importance of this mobile app and its potential flaws in usability design, I want to use the 10 heuristics to evaluate the app with the hope to figure out if there is space for improvement in the app’s user experience design. 
#### Overall Evaluation:
When I first downloaded the CDC app, I expected to see the format and layout of the app’s homepage similar to that of CDC website’ homepage, but it is not. The layout of the homepage is similar to a newsfeed; a user can scroll down to see different public health news/articles/subpages, which are organized into blocks. Two COVID-19 feeds are at the top. The overall experience is mildly friendly. The app is consistent in its choices of fonts, colors, and element sizes. The only two touch gestures required are tap and scroll, which are both intuitive and simple gestures. The app provides users with sufficient control and freedom, while it could provide more flexibility in user choices of content, error prevention and diagnose, and available search tools. It would also be better if it follows conventional mobile app layout to avoid additional cognitive load. Users might miss the menu button and be confused by the lack of home button if they do not take a look on the app thoroughly. 

### 1: Visibility of system status
- The app does provide appropriate and timely feedbacks during user interaction most of the time. One appropriate feedback is a progress indicator - a “loading” animation icon -when I clicked onto a link, so that I knew it took a little bit of time to go on to a new page. Another appropriate feedback design is the toggle icon for each filter content choice under the filter menu. For instance, I only wanted to see articles related to the coronavirus and clicked on the toggle icon next to the “Coronavirus Disease 2019” choice. The toggle icon allowed me to know whether I successfully “turned on” or “turned off” a filter choice. When users turn off all the filters and return to the homepage, there is no content and a notification box is shown notifying users that the content is filtered out. The app also displays a page title on the top bar to inform users which page they are on. These are all appropriate and timely feedbacks that allow users to be aware of the system status immediately.
- There is one minor problem with the CDC logo on the navigation bar at the top as the feedback might confuse users. When I was on the homepage, I tried to look for the app’s information page and I thought the logo could take me to there; but when I clicked onto it, it only changed color and nothing else changed. However, when I was on a subpage and clicked onto the same CDC logo, it took me back to the homepage. This inconsistency in feedbacks of the CDC logo icon might confuse users when they first encounter the app. However, it is not a very severe flaw because it does not affect users’ overall experience with the other elements in the app, and users can also figure this out on more trials. One solution of this problem is to create a home bottom at a common place, such as the bottom of the app. Severity Rating (2).

### 2: Match between system and the real world
- Most language choices and UI elements choices follow real-world conventions and speak the users’ language. For instance, the icons of the menu button, filter button, and home button are all identical to the icons used for these purposes. However, the language choices of some sub-sections under menu sections might cause confusion. For instance, the “Vital Signs” under “articles” section conveys an obscure meaning to me. I did not know what this section is actually about until I clicked on the link and found articles on various health topics such as childhood trauma prevention and Rabies. The sections might need a more descriptive name to avoid user confusion. Severity Rating (2). 

### 3: User control and freedom
- The app provides sufficient and appropriate freedom and control. There is a “back” button on every article page that allows users to “undo” their unwanted actions. For instance, when I clicked onto a random page that led to an external link of the article and I wanted to go back, there was always a tap bar at the bottom stating “back to the CDC app”, so that I could click onto that and go back. Severity Rating (1). 

### 4: Consistency and standards
- In terms of external consistency, the CDC app does not contain a bottom tap bar that most other apps have. When I first opened the app, I was confused as I was expecting a bottom tap bar that might contain different features, such as search tool or menu categories. Then I realized the menu button is next to the CDC logo and is embedded within the navigation bar at the top, which was hard to tell at first glance. This could add to users’ cognitive load when users explore the app as it is not consistent with the standards followed by most other mobile platforms. While users might get used to the app design, the overall experience could also be less comfortable because of the lack of tap bar. This experience is also persistent. Another problem similar to this one is the home button problem I mentioned before in #1 Visibility of System Status. These problems could be solved by making the menu bar more noticeable or creating a bottom tap bar that contained menu and home buttons. Severity Rating (2).

### 5: Error prevention
-	While the app provides appropriate and enough options for “undo”, it does not set any error prevention design before users committing the actions. For instance, on the homepage, there is a search bar at the top that allows users to type in information to search on the CDC’s website. When I was typing, the search bar did not prompt any suggestion for what I might be searching and did not correct any misspelling. So if users type a phrase wrong, it will still take users to the result page and users have to go back and change their search manually. Even though this is not a severe problem, it could waste users’ time in searching for information. Severity Rating (2). 

### 6: Recognition rather than recall
- The app does not indicate which articles a user has clicked into and read before, so the app does not help a user to recognize his/her viewing history or previously visited content. This might cause extra cognitive load if users want to know which articles they have read before but lose track of the articles. Severity Rating (2). 

### 7: Flexibility and efficiency of use
- The app does allow certain flexibility and efficiency for users, but the features might not be recognized and welcomed by novice users. The appropriate features included a “back to the top” icon when users are scrolling down along a page. An example of the drawback could be the filter feature. The filter button at the top of the navigation bar allows users to choose what article categories they want to see on their homepage and what they don’t want to see. However, someone who has not seen this feature before might not be able to know this app provides this flexibility. Thus, certain features might not be friendly to users who do not know the features. Severity Rating (2). 

### 8: Aesthetic and minimalist design
- The app follows a minimalist design as it does not contain any extra graphics or words. Section names are listed in short and plain text under the Menu page. Articles are displayed as blocks and each article was shown by a bold headline and a few lines of its content. However, some sections contained a lot of articles. It could be overwhelmed as the articles were not related to each other and were not sorted. The design of sections could be improved if there are filter feature, search feature, or sort feature that allow users to customize the displays of different articles. Severity Rating (2). 

### 9: Help users recognize, diagnose, and recover from errors
- The app does not provide any features that help users to recognize and diagnose from errors. For instance, the search bar does not auto-correct users’ misspelling and does not make suggestion to users’ search and solve the problems. Users need to make sure they do not make any typing mistakes or misspelling a disease’s name. Severity Rating (3). 

### 10: Help and documentation
- The about/information page was hard to find for users who are not familiar with the app, as it is at the bottom of the menu page. Users have to first figure out there is a menu button and then scroll down to the button to find the information page. In addition, the link to information page is small and the color is consistent with the other links above it, so it is not obvious enough and users might ignore it easily. Except for this flaw, the documentation was appropriate. It provides enough descriptions of the app and space for user feedbacks, as users can click on a link under the page and directly email the developer. Severity Rating (2). 
